As designers, we do have this habit of
going, well, that's the techies problem.
[LAUGH] But actually, we need to
work in harmony with developers and
side by side with them.
So we need to understand
technical feasibility and
whether our idea was scaled.
Is there anyone here old
enough to remember dig.com?
Yeah, it was shoot it's really
funny how something could be so
huge at one point and
then nobody knows about it anymore.
It really was, it was like Facebook level
huge back in the day, and I happened
to be friends with the lead designer
there and the lead developer, right?
Daniel Burka and Joe Stump.
And they told me this or
Daniel told me this story.
The whole premise of Digg was
that you had, it was a bit,
I guess it was a bit like Reddit.
That you could post stories basically,
things in the news that's up and
then people can dig it, vote it up.
Okay, and so there was this little
badge where you could vote things up or
down, and Daniel was messing around
designing a new version of the badge.
And luckily he showed it to Joe before
he showed it to the big bosses, right?
Because Joe took one look at it and
said, if you design it like that,
I'm gonna have to add at
least ten new servers, right,
simply because of the demand that it would
put on the code base doing it like that.
So understanding the technology and
the feasibility and
the scalability of things is so important.
I'm not saying you need to be an expert
developer, but you do need to a,
at least talk to your developer.
And if I'm gonna throw something
controversial into the thing,
I would say you need to know how
to write HTML, CSS as well, right?
I will get in trouble for that,
I suspect, because a lot of people
disagree with me over that.
But I think it's fundamental.
And when we come on later to talk about
prototyping in Figma and design systems,
you will see just how important it
is to understand how code works,
at least a basic level, if you wanna
call yourself a product designer.
Or, I would argue, a web designer or
a user interface designer.
Anyway, you can shout
at me when you want to.
All the hands that went up then.
[LAUGH] Yeah, you go for it first.
>> How important do you think
Javascript is to product designers and-
>> Yeah, a Javascript is a bit trickier.
I don't include that as a requirement.
The reason I don't, and
this will become more obvious
when we start looking at Figma and
and prototyping later.
But the big thing that you need to
understand as a designer is the idea of
the CSS box model, right?
So, it's how pages are constructed and
put together.
That's the fundamental
because you make life so
much easier if you just
design things well in Figma.
But when it comes to interaction,
then A, it starts getting
more complicated and there is only so
much that you can do.
And B, probably the way that you
would do it would have to be
completely thrown out by a grownup anyway.
So I wouldn't include that as much.
I mean,
I know I'd have write a bit of Javascript.
I certainly know how to write using
various Javascript libraries, but
it's not a necessity.
It's not as big a deal.
Yeah, you had a question.
>> When it comes to HTML and CSS,
are you saying that it'd be good for
product designers to become fluent in it,
to be able to say,
okay, I can write my own?
Or are you saying it's important to
conceptually understand how it works and
why some things are done?
>> Both, so what I mean by that
is you've got to start somewhere.
As I said in my user research and testing
course, something's better than nothing.
So to begin with, just get your head
around conceptually how it works,
but I wouldn't stop there.
I would say, you need to, if you've
got a page in front of you in Figma,
I think it would be healthy and good
that you could build that page, right?
You won't build it as well as
the developer will, right?
But you should at least be
able to have a go, right?
And get to roughly the right result.
That would be my recommendation, but
I don't wanna shame anybody from it.
I don't wanna make people to feel
inadequate if they've not got that
capability.
And conceptually understanding it
is a really good starting point,
but we should always be pushing to expand
our understanding and knowledge, right?
And I was saying you need to
learn a bit about psychology,
you need to learn a bit about marketing.
Well, you need to learn a little
bit about development as well.
So just push yourself, I guess is what
I'm saying more than anything else.
The other thing that is crucial,
I think, to product design,
and we're gonna unpack all of
these things more later, but
is this idea of just simplicity, right?
But having a mechanism by which
you can take anything and
make it simpler, right?
Having a process for
doing that is so invaluable, right?
I regularly get called in to sort
out [LAUGH] web apps, right?
And I was doing one quite
recently actually for
a warehouse management software.
And it had been,
created by very talented team of
developers that have done an amazing job.
But they've been asked to add more and
more and more to it new pieces of
fat every time a client asked for a piece
of functionality, they just added it in.
And it's not a job to kind of
sort out the user experience.
So eventually they got me involved.
And the route that I use when I'm faced
by that is is really, really simple.
It's not rocket science, is this is
a starting point event or you do reach
a point where you need to kind of rethink
the whole structure of the thing.
But what I was basically doing there
was going through screen by screen and
on each screen I would look at every
single element on that screen.
Every menu item, every icon,
every input field,
absolutely everything on that screen and
I ask myself three questions in order,
right?
Question number one, is can I remove this?
What happens if I just remove it,
delete it as getting rid of it, right?
And sometimes it's amazing
how much you can do that.
So for example, icons, right,
that app was riddled with icons,
every option had an icon next to it.
And then you reach a point where it's
like, how does this icon help, right?
Because it was all English speaking.
It wasn't meant to be multilingual.
So it's like, what's this adding to it?
What would happen if I deleted it?
And the answer was, well, nothing.
At which point you go, well,
let's delete it then, right?
But obviously, there are some
things you can't delete, right?
For example, the main menu that was
going down the left hand side, right?
Loads of different options,
all of which were apparently essential
set aside whether they all were or not.
So as I worked down that menu,
my next question was, well,
can I hide some of these
elements in this menu, right?
Instead of they had like 30, I think
something like 30 elements all down a side
menu and it was like, my eyes are bleeding
looking at this list and I said well,
which ones of these are used the most,
right?
To which the answer was well, people
really are only looking at those four.
All right, well,
why are all the others there then?
So I put all the rest under a kind of dot
dot dot thing or hiding things away, or
should we be doing that?
Well, if 80% of people are looking at
those four, then let's make it easy for
those 80% of people before we
worry about the 20% looking for
other obscure things, right?
And sure,
there were other ways of solving it.
We could have had different permissions
that had different things in the menu, but
that was the quick and
easy way of just hiding some stuff, right?
And then, but
sometimes you can't hide things.
So the biggest, the great example of that
is, we need to show our privacy policy and
our cookie notifications for
compliance reasons, right?
It was you,
you work in banking, don't you?
As I remember, yeah.
Banking's terrible for this.
You have loads of compliance
things all over the place, right?
No, no,
you couldn't hide that because you need to
tell people that their house is at risk.
But what you can do is you can shrink it
you can visually de-emphasize it, right?
So that it doesn't dominate the design and
it's not adding confusion, and clutter.
I mean, this isn't rocket science,
is it, but you have to go through
every element on every screen doing
this saying, can I remove it?
No, can I hide it?
No, can I shrink it?
Yes, for every element.